Bond, C. F., Jr., & DePaulo, B. M. (2006). Accuracy of Deception Judgments.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10(3), 214-234.
DOI: 10.1207/s15327957pspr1003_2
Text transcript (page-marker-free), prepared for the registry corpus.
The appendix listing and the reference list of the original article are
omitted here; figure tables are rendered as plain text.

ABSTRACT

We analyze the accuracy of deception judgments, synthesizing research
results from 206 documents and 24,483 judges. In relevant studies, people
attempt to discriminate lies from truths in real time with no special aids
or training. In these circumstances, people achieve an average of 54%
correct lie-truth judgments, correctly classifying 47% of lies as deceptive
and 61% of truths as nondeceptive. Relative to cross-judge differences in
accuracy, mean lie-truth discrimination abilities are nontrivial, with a
mean accuracy d of roughly .40. This produces an effect that is at roughly
the 60th percentile in size, relative to others that have been
meta-analyzed by social psychologists. Alternative indexes of lie-truth
discrimination accuracy correlate highly with percentage correct, and rates
of lie detection vary little from study to study. Our meta-analyses reveal
that people are more accurate in judging audible than visible lies, that
people appear deceptive when motivated to be believed, and that individuals
regard their interaction partners as honest. We propose that people judge
others' deceptions more harshly than their own and that this double
standard in evaluating deceit can explain much of the accumulated
literature.

INTRODUCTION

Deception entered Western thought in a telling guise when the author of
Genesis placed a serpent in the Garden of Eden. By lying, the serpent
enticed Eve into committing the original sin. Thus deception was enshrined
as the ultimate source of evil.

Lying has always posed a moral problem. Aristotle wrote that "falsehood is
in itself mean and culpable"; St. Augustine believed that every lie is a
sin; and Kant regarded truthfulness as an "unconditional duty which holds
in all circumstances." Others take a more permissive stance. Aquinas
countenanced lies told in the service of virtue, and Machiavelli extolled
deceit in the service of self.

Having been a moral issue for millennia, deception came also to be viewed
as a legal challenge. The polygraph, the psychological stress evaluator,
brain fingerprints, EEGs--these have been promoted for their ability to
divine deception. Yet in the first decade of the 21st century, American
jurisprudence entrusts lie detection to ordinary citizens. U.S. courts bar
technological aids to lie detection, and deception experts too. Witnesses
must appear in person before jurors who are the "sole judges" of the
witnesses' believability. American jurors are instructed to judge a
person's truthfulness by considering his or her "demeanor upon the witness
stand" and "manner of testifying."

In this article, we summarize research on 4,435 individuals' attempts to
dupe 24,483 others. We offer quantitative measures of deceptive success and
identify conditions under which people are more and less gullible.

CHARACTERIZATIONS OF DECEPTION

"No mortal can keep a secret. If his lips are silent, he chatters with his
finger-tips; betrayal oozes out of him at every pore." -- Freud (1905)

With this quotation, Ekman and Friesen (1969) opened a pioneering article
on the psychology of deception. In their view, liars face challenges. They
must guard against nonverbal "leakage" of feelings they are trying to
conceal and must hide their own affective reactions to the act of lying,
such as guilt, anxiety, and shame. Ekman and Friesen predicted that people
are most likely to show deception in the legs and feet, less likely to show
it in the hands, and least likely to show deception in the face--people
have more ability and motivation to control the face than the feet and
legs.

Thirty-two years later, Ekman (2001) emphasized the ambiguity of nonverbal
deception cues. There being no foolproof sign of deceit, many inferences of
deception are mistaken. Ekman attributes failures at lie detection to many
factors: poor evolutionary preparation, socialization to overlook lies, the
psychological benefits of trust, and inadequate feedback from errors.

Buller and Burgoon (1996) proposed a theory for face-to-face deceptive
interactions. Theoretically, receivers are more likely to perceive a person
as truthful if they are interacting with that person rather than seeing the
person on videotape.

DePaulo and colleagues favored a self-presentational perspective on
deception. In this view, lying is a part of everyday life. People tell lies
to avoid embarrassment and make positive impressions. Most of these serious
lies involve a self-presentational stake: the liar's reputation. The signs
of deception are subtle, and social norms encourage people to accept
others' representations at face value.

A DOUBLE STANDARD

We offer a new framework for understanding this subject. We believe that
there is a double standard in evaluating deception.

Our framework begins by noting that people regard truth telling as
unexceptional. They accept most statements at face value, rarely inquiring
into the authenticity of what they hear. People come to regard an assertion
as truthful only after entertaining the possibility that it was deceptive.

There are two perspectives on deception. One is the perspective people
hold when they themselves are lying; a second is the perspective they bring
to others' lies. As deceivers, people are practical. They accommodate
perceived needs by lying. Of course, deceivers rarely regard their own
falsehoods as lies but as something more innocuous. They exaggerate,
minimize, and omit. Regarding half-truths and self-editing as necessities
of social life, deceivers see deception as similar to these sanctioned
practices. Lies occasion little anxiety, guilt, or shame. They are easy to
rationalize. To the liar, there is nothing exceptional about lying.

If pragmatic about their own deceptions, people become moralistic when they
consider others' lies. Then deception is wrong and reflects negatively on
the deceiver. Indeed, people view duplicity as one of the gravest moral
failings. In their ratings of 555 personality trait terms, college students
rate as least desirable the trait of being a liar. Social logic assumes
that honest people always act honestly; thus, to label a statement a lie is
to imply that the person who made that statement is a liar. People have a
prescriptive stereotype of the liar--stricken with shame, wracked by the
threat of exposure, liars leak signs of their inner torment. They fidget,
avoid eye contact, and can scarcely bring themselves to speak--a worldwide
stereotype holds (Global Deception Research Team, 2006). The stereotypic
reasons for lying are nefarious too.

Implications of the double standard: Perceivers draw on the liar
stereotype when considering a target's veracity. Targets who most resemble
the stereotype are most likely to be regarded as liars; those who least
resemble it are most likely to be believed. One factor affecting resemblance
would be the stakes surrounding a speaker's credibility. Most lies are
little. When telling white lies of the sort often studied by researchers,
people have no reason to appear tormented. Thus they should often be judged
truthful. Occasionally the stakes of being believed are big. When facing
huge stakes, people who ruminate over their credibility may come to match
the liar stereotype. Then they would be judged deceptive, even if they were
telling the truth.

RESEARCH ON DETECTION ACCURACY

Researchers conduct experiments: they arrange for people to lie and tell
the truth (senders), and for others to judge the veracity of the resulting
statements (receivers judging messages). We confine attention to receivers
who must judge deceit without the aid of polygraphs, fMRIs, or other
physiological devices--receivers who judge deception from a brief encounter
with an unfamiliar sender in real time. These judgments are based on verbal
content and the liar's behavior.

Often, lie detection abilities are expressed as percentage correct.
Ordinarily, half the messages a receiver encounters are truths and half
lies; by guessing, a receiver could expect to achieve 50% correct
classifications. Kraut (1980) offered a statistical summary of results from
10 such experiments, finding a mean accuracy rate of 57%, and concluded
that "the accuracy of human lie detectors is low." Vrij (2000), summarizing
39 studies published after 1980, replicated Kraut's finding: receivers of
more recent research achieve an average of 56.6% accuracy.

Along with narrative reviews, these statistical summaries have inspired a
consensus--"it is considered virtually axiomatic... that individuals are at
best inaccurate at deception detection."

Some meta-analyses expressed accuracy as a standardized mean difference
(d): DePaulo, Zuckerman, and Rosenthal (1980) calculated a median d of .86
in 16 early studies; Mattson et al. (2000) found d = 1.07 in 7 studies of
organizational deception; Zuckerman et al. (1981) found that receivers with
access to speech regard lies as less credible than truths with a mean d =
1.14. Compared with reference values (Richard, Bond, & Stokes-Zoota, 2003:
d of .20 small, .40 medium, .60 large), these would suggest strong
detection.

There is also a bias to perceive messages as truthful. Zuckerman et al.
(1981) found a mean d = .86 for the truth-accuracy advantage; Vrij (2000)
summarized 9 percentage-correct studies finding a strong truth bias--a mean
of 61.5% truth judgments, 67% accuracy for truths, and 44% accuracy for
lies.

THIS REVIEW

The largest previous review was based on 39 studies; here we summarize
evidence from 206 studies. We assess accuracy in terms of percentage
correct, the standardized mean difference, and alternative indexes (log
odds ratio and d').

Search and inclusion criteria: computer-based searches through August 2005;
all English-language reports of original research on the accuracy of
judgments of lies and truths. Excluded: studies where individuals judged
only lies or only truths; studies where judges received experimental
training or instructions on how to detect deception; attention-focusing
instructions; studies where senders and receivers knew one another prior to
the study; judgments using systematic aids (polygraph records,
Criterion-Based Content Analysis, behavior codings from repeated viewings);
non-English reports; senders or receivers younger than 17; senders
role-playing an imagined person; implicit deception judgments; judgments of
affect. 206 documents satisfied the criteria (133 published, 73
unpublished; dated 1941-2005).

Identifying independent samples: the unit of aggregation is the receiver
sample; the data set consists of 384 independent receiver samples.

Variables coded: number of senders, number of receivers, percentage
correct, percentage truth, accuracy standardized mean difference, sender
motivation, receiver motivation, sender preparation, sender interaction,
receiver expertise, judgment medium, baseline exposure. Reliabilities on
quantitative variables were uniformly high (lowest r = .894).

RESULTS

Characteristics of the literature. The documents reported results on
24,483 receivers' deception judgments of 6,651 messages offered by 4,435
senders. In a typical study, 41 receivers judged 16 messages; the typical
message lasted 52 seconds. In most cases the medium was audiovisual (67.4%
of samples; video-only 12.2%, audio-only 10.9%). About 55% of sender
samples had no particular motivation to succeed when lying; more than 40%
were motivated. Receivers were rarely motivated (barely 12%). A little over
half the samples judged senders who had time to prepare; about 65% judged
senders who were interacting as they lied. Only 12% of receiver samples
could claim occupational expertise (2,842 experts: law enforcement
personnel, judges, psychiatrists, job interviewers, auditors, polygraph
examiners, federal agents, customs officials, and criminals).

Percentage correct. In 292 samples, receivers classified messages as lies
or truths. More than three fourths of these means are greater than 50% and
less than one in seven is greater than 60%. The unweighted mean percentage
correct lie-truth classification is 53.98%. The highest mean in any sample
is 73%, the lowest 31%. Means at the first, second, and third quartile are
50.07%, 53.90%, and 58.00%.

The funnel pattern: variability is high among means based on small numbers
of judgments and low among means based on large numbers. The observed
standard deviation in mean percentage correct is only 6.11%. Receiver
sampling error accounts for 45.29% of the observed between-study variance;
the true standard deviation across studies is only 4.52%. Weighted
techniques reveal a mean of 53.46% correct; 95% confidence interval 53.31%
to 53.59%. This mean is significantly greater than 50% (t(7994) = 39.78, p
< .0001).

Standardized mean differences. For 107 samples that rated messages on
multipoint scales, the unweighted mean d was .35 (s = .47); quartiles .09,
.31, .67; the weighted mean d for lie-truth discrimination is .34 (95% CI
.31 to .38). This is less than half as large as earlier rated-veracity
reviews (ds exceeding .85). For dichotomous classifications, the weighted
mean standardized difference was .42 in 216 samples; binomial-imputed, .40
in 61 others. Combining all 384 receiver samples: weighted and unweighted
mean ds of .39 and .49; median .39. Converted to correlations: mean accuracy
r = .19 (weighted .21). A d of .39 (r of .21) ranks above the 60th
percentile relative to 474 social psychological effects.

Percentage judged true. In 207 samples, percentage truth classifications
show an unweighted mean of 56.86% and weighted mean of 55.23%, each
significantly greater than 50% (95% CI for weighted mean 54.99% to 55.46%).
There is no relationship between the percentage of truth judgments and the
percentage of correct classifications across studies (r = -.008).

Stimulus accuracy. Unweighted analyses reveal that people correctly
classify 61.34% of truthful messages as truthful and 47.55% of deceptive
messages as deceptive. The greater the percentage of lies correctly
classified in a study, the lower the percentage of truths correctly
classified (r = -.53, p < .0001). Cross-study differences result largely
from differences in response threshold, rather than differences in
discrimination ability.

Response accuracy. Given that a person has judged a statement truthful,
what is the likelihood it was in fact truthful; given a lie judgment, the
likelihood it was actually a lie? Across 187 samples judging equal numbers
of truths and lies, judgments of truthfulness are less likely to be accurate
than judgments of deceptiveness: unweighted means 54.12% versus 55.84%,
t(187) = 5.12, p < .01. The greater the response accuracy of truth
judgments in a study, the greater the response accuracy of lie judgments
(r = .80, p < .0001).

Other accuracy measures. The mean log-odds-based analysis implies the odds
of judging a truthful message truthful are 1.46 times the odds of judging
a deceptive message truthful (95% CI 1.41-1.51), implying means of 62.30%
and 47.53% correct for truths and lies respectively. The mean d' is .24
(median .22); its implied maximum percentage correct is 54.79%, close to
the 54.45% directly computable. The three accuracy measures are highly
intercorrelated (percentage correct with log odds ratio r = .979; with d'
r = .988). Lies are discriminated from truths at levels slightly better
than flipping a coin.

DETERMINANTS OF ACCURACY

Judges achieve about 54% lie-truth discrimination accuracy on average.
We examine six factors: (a) deception medium, (b) motivation, (c)
preparation, (d) baseline exposure, (e) interaction, and (f) receiver
expertise--each assessed via within-study comparisons, between-study
comparisons, and statistically adjusted comparisons.

Deception medium. Lie-truth discrimination accuracy is lower if judgments
are made in a video rather than an audiovisual or audio medium (video vs.
audiovisual weighted mean d = -.44; video vs. audio d = -.37; video vs.
written transcript d = -.28; each significant). The levels achieved from
transcript, audiovisual, and audio presentations do not differ
significantly from one another. Messages are perceived as less truthful if
judged from video than audiovisual or audio (ds = -.29 and -.34). Between
studies: truth classifications--video 52.18%, audio 58.78%, audiovisual
56.32%; correct classifications--video 50.52%, audio 53.01%, audiovisual
54.03%; accuracy d--video .077, audio .419, audiovisual .438.

Interpretation: the usual stereotype of a liar is largely visual, hence is
most strongly evoked by video images of people speaking. Those who can be
viewed as tormented are judged to be lying, but apparent torment reflects
many factors other than deceit.

On Ekman and Friesen's hypothesis (more deception cues in the body than the
face): video-based attempts divided into face-only (k = 15), body-only
(k = 9), face plus body (k = 29). Detection is unsuccessful when receivers
see only the sender's face, and similarly unsuccessful with only the body
(weighted mean accuracy d = .01, -.15, and .12 respectively)--only partial
support at best.

Motivation. DePaulo's motivational impairment hypothesis: the truths and
lies of highly motivated senders will be more easily discriminated than
those of unmotivated senders (unless receivers have only a transcript).
Experimental evidence: lies are easier to discriminate if told by motivated
rather than unmotivated senders (weighted mean d = .171, Z = 7.10, p <
.0001, in 42 experimental effects from 20 studies).

The double-standard hypothesis has a different implication: people who are
afraid of being disbelieved may come to resemble the stereotypic liar; it
should matter little whether or not a highly motivated speaker is lying.
What matters is the speaker's fear of being disbelieved. Between studies:
motivation to be believed reduces a speaker's apparent honesty (truth
classifications: no motivation 57.24%, motivation 53.43%). Motivation
significantly reduces senders' video and audiovisual appearance of
truthfulness: unmotivated vs. motivated senders classified as truthful by
54.44% vs. 46.84% of receivers in video-only presentations. Motivation has
no effect on how truthful a sender sounds. On lie-truth discrimination
itself, between-study evidence does not indicate that motivation makes
liars easier to detect (adjusted ds .396 vs. .371, n.s.).

Preparation. 15 studies experimentally manipulated sender preparation time
(24 effects on accuracy, 10 on truthfulness). Receivers achieve higher
lie-truth detection accuracy when judging unplanned rather than planned
messages (weighted mean d = -.144, Z = 4.49, p < .01), and planned messages
appear more truthful than unplanned messages (weighted mean d = .133, Z =
2.35, p < .05). Between studies, planned messages appear slightly less
honest than spontaneous (mixed for accuracy).

Baseline exposure to sender. 21 experimental comparisons of judges who had
versus had not been previously exposed to the target: baseline exposure
improves lie-truth discrimination. Receivers achieve a mean of 55.91%
accuracy when given a baseline exposure versus 52.26% without (within-
study d = .239). Between studies: exposure 54.22% vs. no exposure 53.35%
correct; senders familiar to the receiver are likely to be given the
benefit of the doubt (truth classifications: exposure 58.37% vs. 56.11%).
Consistent with the double-standard framework, people are reluctant to
imply that someone familiar to them is a liar.

Interaction. Individuals are judged more truthful by their interaction
partners than by third-party observers (within studies, weighted mean d =
.26, Z = 4.10, p < .0001). Between studies: interaction with the receiver
65.32% truth classifications vs. 54.51% no interaction. Controlled
experiments show no significant difference in lie-truth discrimination by
interaction partners versus third-party observers (ds = .286 vs. .209,
n.s.). The reluctance to attribute deception to interaction partners
results from an unwanted dispositional implication--insinuating that the
partner is a liar.

Receiver expertise. In 19 studies, expert and nonexpert receivers judged
the same messages (20 independent comparisons). This cumulation yields no
evidence that experts are superior to nonexperts in discriminating lies
from truths: weighted mean d = -.025 (95% CI -.105 to .055); the direction
if anything favors nonexperts. No significant difference in truth bias
either (experts 54.09% vs. nonexperts 55.74% truth judgments). Between
studies, experts appear more skeptical than nonexperts (52.28% vs. 55.69%
truth classifications); raw comparisons may suggest an expert advantage in
discrimination (d .488 vs. .380), but the apparent superiority disappears
when means are statistically adjusted (adjusted d .388 vs. .387). Experts
are not good lie detectors: on average they achieve less than 55%
lie-truth discrimination accuracy.

Publication status. No significant differences between published and
unpublished studies in discrimination (53.19% vs. 53.75%). Truthfulness
biases were stronger in unpublished research (56.75% vs. 54.27% truth
classifications).

DISCUSSION

How successful are people at duping others? Across hundreds of experiments,
typical rates of lie-truth discrimination are slightly above 50%. For the
grand mean, 54% is a reasonable estimate.

The ability also corresponds to a nontrivial standardized effect: a mean
difference of approximately .40 standard deviations, larger than 60% of the
research phenomena studied by social psychologists.

Truthful messages are more often judged correctly than deceptive messages;
the percentage of correct judgments in any real-world setting may depend on
the base rate of deception there. In a setting where virtually no lies were
told, the literature would suggest a detection rate of roughly 60%; where
virtually every statement was a lie, a detection rate of, say, 48% might be
expected. Liars have intuitions about situational trust too: if they can
choose where to attempt their deceptions, they should opt for settings in
which targets are most trusting.

People are more inclined to judge deceptive messages as truthful than
truthful messages as deceptive. Receivers contribute to this truth bias,
but senders' contributions should also be acknowledged: when people try to
appear truthful, their efforts are rewarded. Across 206 studies people
render a mean of some 56% truth judgments; this figure may understate the
presumption of truth telling in real life, where laboratory judgments are
forced.

A pattern in the literature: scholars resist the implication that people
can barely discriminate lies from truths by labelling some methodological
feature an artifact, correcting it, and announcing uniquely valid findings.
Occasionally a researcher finds a detection rate of 70% (or so) and
proclaims a momentous discovery; those rates occur on tests with only a
small number of messages and are attained by a subset of receivers. From a
meta-analytic perspective, random variation is the most plausible
explanation, as the funnel pattern suggests.

We are more impressed by the regularity of the results. Despite decades of
research effort to maximize the accuracy of deception judgments, detection
rates rarely budge. Professionals' judgments, interactants' judgments,
judgments of high-stakes lies, judgments of unsanctioned lies, judgments
made by long-term acquaintances--all reveal detection rates within a few
points of 50%. We wonder if it is premature to abort the quest for 90% lie
detection and accept the conclusion implied by the first 384 research
samples: that to people who must judge deception in real time with no
special aids, many lies are undetectable.

Some factors facilitate discrimination and others impede it. Lies are more
detectable when they can be heard. Facial behaviors provide no indication
of a speaker's veracity, corroborating the theory that the face is well
controlled. Judges achieve better discrimination if they have baseline
exposure to the sender and if the sender is unprepared. People who are
motivated to be believed look deceptive whether or not they are lying.
Expert judges may be slightly more skeptical than novices; they make many
mistakes regardless.

The double standard, discussed: people project onto the deceptive a host of
morally fueled emotions--anxiety, shame, guilt. Drawing on this stereotype
to assess others' veracity, people find that the stereotype seldom fits. In
underestimating the liar's capacity for self-rationalization, judges'
moralistic stereotype has the unintended effect of enabling successful
deceit. Because deceptive torment resides primarily in the judge's
imagination, many lies are mistaken for truths. When torment is perceived,
it is often not a consequence of deception but of a speaker's motivation to
be believed. High stakes rarely make people feel guilty about lying; more
often they allow deceit to be easily rationalized.

People avoid attributing deception to others with whom they are familiar.
Perhaps the truth bias represents an extension of the self-bias to others
reminiscent of the self. Expert judges are willing to imply that others are
liars--but they are rarely sitting in judgment of their peers; self-biases
do not extend to outsiders.

On deception failures: research participants disbelieve nearly 50% of
senders' deception attempts and nearly 40% of their attempts at truth
telling. In the rough actuarial aggregate, liars fail as often as
detectors. Many people avoid being caught in the act; when asked to
describe their discovery of a lie, people rarely state that the discovery
was prompted by behaviors displayed at the time of the attempted deception.
Rather, they say lie detection took days, weeks, or even months, and
involved physical evidence or third parties (Park, Levine, McComack,
Morrison, & Ferrara, 2002).

Skilled liars may be worse relationship partners than people whose lies are
transparent; inept liars pose no threat insofar as their attempts fail
before damage is done. Skill at high-stakes deception may be an
interpersonal liability, and so-called deception failures may in the long
run be adaptive. The craftiest may cultivate reputations for honesty by
telling the truth on trivial matters, so that when deceit promises the
largest reward others have been lulled into unwarranted trust.

Limitations in the evidence: researchers have excluded extra-behavioral
cues to deception, restricted the time span for pondering, blinded judges
to motivational contingencies, and neutralized naturally occurring
correlates of the propensity to lie. Outside the laboratory, additional
information is important. People differ widely in the propensity to lie,
and this individual difference may be discernable. Future studies will be
needed to explore the impact of extrabehavioral information. Perhaps the
90% lie detection barrier will someday be broken.

In the meantime: yes, people often fail in their efforts to divine
deception. It is important also to note that research participants often
fail when trying to dupe others. Perhaps it would be unsurprising if liars
and would-be detectors had arrived at an equilibrium. If liars were much
better, truth telling would be less common; if detectors were much better,
few lies would be attempted.
