MILGRAM, S. (1963). Behavioral Study of Obedience.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67(4), 371-378.
Text transcript (page-marker-free), prepared for the registry corpus.
The reference list of the original article is omitted here.

ABSTRACT

This article describes a procedure for the study of destructive obedience
in the laboratory. It consists of ordering a naive subject (S) to
administer increasingly more severe punishment to a victim in the context
of a learning experiment. Punishment is administered by means of a shock
generator with 30 graded switches ranging from Slight Shock to Danger:
Severe Shock. The victim is a confederate of the experimenter (E). The
primary dependent variable is the maximum shock the S is willing to
administer before he refuses to continue further. 26 Ss obeyed the
experimental commands fully, and administered the highest shock on the
generator. 14 Ss broke off the experiment at some point after the victim
protested and refused to provide further answers. The procedure created
extreme levels of nervous tension in some Ss. Profuse sweating, trembling,
and stuttering were typical expressions of this emotional disturbance. One
unexpected sign of tension--yet to be explained--was the regular occurrence
of nervous laughter, which in some Ss developed into uncontrollable
seizures.

INTRODUCTION

Obedience is as basic an element in the structure of social life as one can
point to. Some system of authority is a requirement of all communal living,
and it is only the man dwelling in isolation who is not forced to respond,
through defiance or submission, to the commands of others. Obedience, as a
determinant of behavior, is of particular relevance to our time. It has
been reliably established that from 1933-45 millions of innocent persons
were systematically slaughtered on command. Gas chambers were built, death
camps were guarded, daily quotas of corpses were produced with the same
efficiency as the manufacture of appliances. These inhumane policies may
have originated in the mind of a single person, but they could only be
carried out on a massive scale if a very large number of persons obeyed
orders.

Obedience is the psychological mechanism that links individual action to
political purpose. It is the dispositional cement that binds men to systems
of authority. Facts of recent history and observation in daily life suggest
that for many persons obedience may be a deeply ingrained behavior
tendency, indeed, a prepotent impulse overriding training in ethics,
sympathy, and moral conduct. C. P. Snow (1961) points to its importance:
"When you think of the long and gloomy history of man, you will find more
hideous crimes have been committed in the name of obedience than have ever
been committed in the name of rebellion."

While the particular form of obedience dealt with in the present study has
its antecedents in these episodes, it must not be thought all obedience
entails acts of aggression against others. Obedience serves numerous
productive functions. Indeed, the very life of society is predicated on its
existence. Obedience may be ennobling and educative and refer to acts of
charity and kindness, as well as to destruction.

GENERAL PROCEDURE

A procedure was devised which seems useful as a tool for studying
obedience. It consists of ordering a naive subject to administer electric
shock to a victim. A simulated shock generator is used, with 30 clearly
marked voltage levels that range from 15 to 450 volts. The instrument bears
verbal designations that range from Slight Shock to Danger: Severe Shock.
The responses of the victim, who is a trained confederate of the
experimenter, are standardized. The orders to administer shocks are given
to the naive subject in the context of a "learning experiment" ostensibly
set up to study the effects of punishment on memory. As the experiment
proceeds the naive subject is commanded to administer increasingly more
intense shocks to the victim, even to the point of reaching the level
marked Danger: Severe Shock. Internal resistances become stronger, and at a
certain point the subject refuses to go on with the experiment. Behavior
prior to this rupture is considered "obedience," in that the subject
complies with the commands of the experimenter. The point of rupture is the
act of disobedience. A quantitative value is assigned to the subject's
performance based on the maximum intensity shock he is willing to
administer before he refuses to participate further. The crux of the study
is to systematically vary the factors believed to alter the degree of
obedience to the experimental commands.

METHOD

Subjects. The subjects were 40 males between the ages of 20 and 50, drawn
from New Haven and the surrounding communities. Subjects were obtained by a
newspaper advertisement and direct mail solicitation. Those who responded
to the appeal believed they were to participate in a study of memory and
learning at Yale University. A wide range of occupations is represented in
the sample. Typical subjects were postal clerks, high school teachers,
salesmen, engineers, and laborers. Subjects ranged in educational level
from one who had not finished elementary school, to those who had doctorate
and other professional degrees. They were paid $4.50 for their
participation. Subjects were told that payment was simply for coming to the
laboratory, and that the money was theirs no matter what happened after
they arrived.

Personnel and locale. The experiment was conducted on the grounds of Yale
University in the elegant interaction laboratory. (This detail is relevant
to the perceived legitimacy of the experiment. In further variations, the
experiment was dissociated from the university, with consequences for
performance.) The role of experimenter was played by a 31-year-old high
school teacher of biology. His manner was impassive, and his appearance
somewhat stern throughout the experiment. He was dressed in a gray
technician's coat. The victim was played by a 47-year-old accountant,
trained for the role; he was of Irish-American stock, whom most observers
found mild-mannered and likable.

Procedure. One naive subject and one victim (an accomplice) performed in
each experiment. A pretext had to be devised that would justify the
administration of electric shock by the naive subject. This was
effectively accomplished by the cover story concerning the relation between
punishment and learning. Subjects drew slips of paper to determine who
would be teacher and who learner; the drawing was rigged so that the naive
subject was always the teacher and the accomplice always the learner.
Immediately after the drawing, the teacher and learner were taken to an
adjacent room and the learner was strapped into an "electric chair"
apparatus. The experimenter explained that the straps were to prevent
excessive movement while the learner was being shocked. The effect was to
make it impossible for him to escape from the situation. To improve
credibility the experimenter declared: "Although the shocks can be
extremely painful, they cause no permanent tissue damage."

Learning task. The lesson administered by the subject was a paired-
associate learning task. The learner communicated answers by pressing one
of four switches, which lit up one of four numbered quadrants in an answer
box located atop the shock generator.

Shock generator. The instrument panel consists of 30 lever switches set in
a horizontal line. Each switch is clearly labeled with a voltage
designation ranging from 15 to 450 volts. There is a 15-volt increment from
one switch to the next going from left to right. Verbal designations run
from Slight Shock through Moderate, Strong, Very Strong, Intense, Extreme
Intensity Shock, to Danger: Severe Shock (two switches beyond simply
marked XXX). The panel was engraved by precision industrial engravers, and
all components were of high quality. No subject suspected that the
instrument was merely simulated.

Sample shock. Each naive subject is given a sample shock of 45 volts prior
to beginning his run as teacher, applied to his own wrist. This further
convinces the subject of the authenticity of the generator.

Shock instructions. The subject is told to administer a shock to the learner
each time he gives a wrong response. Moreover--and this is the key
command--the subject is instructed to "move one level higher on the shock
generator each time the learner flashes a wrong answer." He is also
instructed to announce the voltage level before administering each shock.
This serves to continually remind subjects of the increasing intensity of
shocks administered to the learner.

Preliminary and regular run. Before the regular run, the teacher is given a
preliminary series of 10 words; the learner answers wrongly 7 times, so
shocks up to 105 volts (moderate shock) are administered in practice.
Subjects are then presented with a second list, told to repeat it until the
learner has learned all pairs correctly, starting from 15 volts and
increasing one step at each wrong answer.

Feedback from the victim. In all conditions the learner gives a
predetermined set of responses, with approximately three wrong answers to
one correct answer. In the present experimental condition no vocal response
or other sign of protest is heard from the learner until Shock Level 300 is
reached. When the 300-volt shock is administered, the learner pounds on the
wall of the room in which he is bound to the electric chair. The pounding
can be heard by the subject. From this point on, the learner's answers no
longer appear on the four-way panel. At this juncture subjects ordinarily
turn to the experimenter for guidance. The experimenter instructs the
subject to treat the absence of a response as a wrong answer, and to shock
according to the usual schedule. The learner's pounding is repeated after
the 315-volt shock; afterwards he is not heard from.

Experimenter feedback. If the subject indicated his unwillingness to go on,
the experimenter responded with a sequence of "prods," using as many as
necessary to bring the subject into line:
  Prod 1: Please continue. or Please go on.
  Prod 2: The experiment requires that you continue.
  Prod 3: It is absolutely essential that you continue.
  Prod 4: You have no other choice, you must go on.
The prods were always made in sequence; only if Prod 1 had been
unsuccessful could Prod 2 be used. If the subject refused to obey after
Prod 4, the experiment was terminated. The experimenter's tone of voice was
at all times firm, but not impolite. The sequence was begun anew on each
occasion that the subject balked.

Special prods. If the subject asked if the learner was liable to suffer
permanent physical injury, the experimenter said: "Although the shocks may
be painful, there is no permanent tissue damage, so please go on." If the
subject said the learner did not want to go on, the experimenter replied:
"Whether the learner likes it or not, you must go on until he has learned
all the word pairs correctly. So please go on."

Dependent measures. The primary dependent measure for any subject is the
maximum shock he administers before he refuses to go any further. A subject
who breaks off at any point prior to the thirtieth shock level is termed a
defiant subject. One who complies fully and proceeds to administer all
shock levels commanded is termed an obedient subject.

Further records. With few exceptions, sessions were recorded on magnetic
tape. Occasional photographs were taken through one-way mirrors. Notes were
kept on unusual behavior. The latency and duration of shocks were measured
by accurate timing devices.

Interview and dehoax. Following the experiment, subjects were interviewed;
open-ended questions, projective measures, and attitude scales were
employed. Afterwards, procedures were undertaken to assure that the subject
would leave the laboratory in a state of well being. A friendly
reconciliation was arranged between the subject and the victim.

RESULTS

Preliminary notions. Before giving an account of the results, it is
instructive to consider how persons predict others will perform when
commanded to administer powerful shocks to another person. Fourteen Yale
seniors, all psychology majors, were provided with a detailed description
of the experimental situation and asked to predict the behavior of 100
hypothetical subjects ("100 Americans of diverse occupations, ranging in
age from 20 to 50 years"). All respondents predicted that only an
insignificant minority would go through to the end of the shock series.
The estimates ranged from 0 to 3 percent; the class mean was 1.2 percent.
The question was also posed informally to colleagues of the author, and the
most general feeling was that few if any subjects would go beyond the
designation Very Strong Shock.

Subjects accept situation. With few exceptions subjects were convinced of
the reality of the experimental situation. In the post-experimental
interview subjects were asked how painful to the learner the last few
shocks were, on a 14-point scale from "Not at all painful" to "Extremely
painful." The modal response was 14 (Extremely painful), with the mean at
13.42.

Signs of extreme tension. Many subjects showed signs of nervousness,
especially upon administering the more powerful shocks. In a large number
of cases the degree of tension reached extremes rarely seen in
sociopsychological laboratory studies. Subjects were observed to sweat,
tremble, stutter, bite their lips, groan, and dig their fingernails into
their flesh. These were characteristic rather than exceptional responses.

One sign of tension was the regular occurrence of nervous laughing fits.
Fourteen of the 40 subjects showed definite signs of nervous laughter and
smiling. The laughter seemed entirely out of place, even bizarre.
Full-blown, uncontrollable seizures were observed for 3 subjects. On one
occasion a seizure was so violently convulsive that it was necessary to
call a halt to the experiment. The subject, a 46-year-old encyclopedia
salesman, was seriously embarrassed by his uncontrollable behavior. In the
post-experimental interviews subjects took pains to point out that they
were not sadistic types, and that the laughter did not mean they enjoyed
shocking the victim.

Distribution of scores. It had been conjectured that persons would not, in
general, agree to administer shocks beyond the level designated as Very
Strong Shock. The obtained distribution deviates radically from the
prediction.

Upon command of the experimenter, each of the 40 subjects went beyond the
expected breakoff point. No subject stopped prior to administering Shock
Level 20 (300 volts--the level at which the victim kicks on the wall and no
longer provides answers).

Of the 40 subjects, 5 refused to obey the experimental commands beyond the
300-volt level. Four more subjects administered one further shock and then
refused to go on. Two broke off at the 330-volt level, and 1 each at 345,
360, and 375 volts. Thus a total of 14 subjects defied the experimenter.
It is instructive to reprint their remarks at the point of defiance,
transcribed from the tape recordings:

[0124] "I think he's trying to communicate, he's knocking... Well it's not
fair to shock the guy... these are terrific volts. I don't think this is
very humane... Oh, I can't go on with this; no, this isn't right. It's a
hell of an experiment. The guy is suffering in there. No, I don't want to
go on. This is crazy." [Subject refused to administer more shocks.]

[0123] "He's banging in there. I'm gonna chicken out. I'd like to continue,
but I can't do that to a man... I'm sorry I can't do that to a man. I'll
hurt his heart. You take your check... No really, I couldn't do it."

These subjects were frequently in a highly agitated and even angered state.
Sometimes verbal protest was at a minimum, and the subject simply got up
from his chair in front of the shock generator and indicated that he wished
to leave the laboratory.

Of the 40 subjects, 26 obeyed the orders of the experimenter to the end,
proceeding to punish the victim until they reached the most potent shock
available on the shock generator (450 volts, two steps beyond the
designation Danger: Severe Shock). The experimenter called a halt to the
session at that point. Although obedient subjects continued to administer
shocks, they often did so under extreme stress. Some expressed reluctance
to administer shocks beyond the 300-volt level, and displayed fears similar
to those who defied the experimenter; yet they obeyed.

After the maximum shocks had been delivered and the experimenter called a
halt, many obedient subjects heaved sighs of relief, mopped their brows,
rubbed their fingers over their eyes, or nervously fumbled cigarettes. Some
shook their heads, apparently in regret. Some subjects had remained calm
throughout, displaying only minimal signs of tension from beginning to end.

DISCUSSION

The experiment yielded two findings that were surprising. The first
concerns the sheer strength of obedient tendencies manifested in this
situation. Subjects have learned from childhood that it is a fundamental
breach of moral conduct to hurt another person against his will. Yet 26
subjects abandon this tenet in following the instructions of an authority
who has no special powers to enforce his commands. To disobey would bring
no material loss to the subject; no punishment would ensue. It is clear
from the remarks and outward behavior of many participants that in
punishing the victim they are often acting against their own values.
Subjects often expressed deep disapproval of shocking a man in the face of
his objections, and others denounced it as stupid and senseless. Yet the
majority complied with the experimental commands.

This outcome was surprising from two perspectives: first, from the
standpoint of predictions made in the questionnaire described earlier.
(Here, however, it is possible that the remoteness of the respondents from
the actual situation, and the difficulty of conveying to them the concrete
details of the experiment, could account for the serious underestimation of
obedience.) But the results were also unexpected to persons who observed
the experiment in progress through one-way mirrors. Observers often uttered
expressions of disbelief upon seeing a subject administer more powerful
shocks to the victim. These persons had a full acquaintance with the
details of the situation, and yet systematically underestimated the amount
of obedience that subjects would display.

The second unanticipated effect was the extraordinary tension generated by
the procedures. One might suppose that a subject would simply break off or
continue as his conscience dictated. Yet this is very far from what
happened. One observer related: "I observed a mature and initially poised
businessman enter the laboratory smiling and confident. Within 20 minutes
he was reduced to a twitching, stuttering wreck, who was rapidly
approaching a point of nervous collapse. He constantly pulled on his
earlobe, and twisted his hands. At one point he pushed his fist into his
forehead and muttered: 'Oh God, let's stop it.' And yet he continued to
respond to every word of the experimenter, and obeyed to the end."

Any understanding of the phenomenon of obedience must rest on an analysis
of the particular conditions in which it occurs. The following features of
the experiment go some distance in explaining the high amount of obedience
observed in the situation.

1. The experiment is sponsored by and takes place on the grounds of an
institution of unimpeachable reputation, Yale University. It may be
reasonably presumed that the personnel are competent and reputable.

2. The experiment is, on the face of it, designed to attain a worthy
purpose--advancement of knowledge about learning and memory. Obedience
occurs not as an end in itself, but as an instrumental element in a
situation that the subject construes as significant and meaningful. He may
not be able to see its full significance, but he may properly assume that
the experimenter does.

3. The subject perceives that the victim has voluntarily submitted to the
authority system of the experimenter. He is not (at first) an unwilling
captive. He has taken the trouble to come to the laboratory, presumably to
aid the experimental research. That he later becomes an involuntary subject
does not alter the fact that initially he consented to participate without
qualification. Thus he has in some degree incurred an obligation toward the
experimenter.

4. The subject, too, has entered the experiment voluntarily, and perceives
himself under obligation to aid the experimenter. He has made a commitment,
and to disrupt the experiment is a repudiation of this initial promise of
aid.

5. Certain features of the procedure strengthen the subject's sense of
obligation to the experimenter. For one, he has been paid for coming to the
laboratory. In part this is cancelled out by the experimenter's statement
that the money is his simply for coming, no matter what happens.

6. From the subject's standpoint, the fact that he is the teacher and the
other man the learner is purely a chance consequence (determined by drawing
lots), and he ran the same risk as the other man in being assigned the role
of learner. Since the assignment of positions was achieved by fair means,
the learner is deprived of any basis of complaint on this count.

7. There is, at best, ambiguity with regard to the prerogatives of a
psychologist and the corresponding rights of his subject. There is a
vagueness of expectation concerning what a psychologist may require of his
subject, and when he is overstepping acceptable limits. Moreover, the
experiment occurs in a closed setting, and thus provides no opportunity for
the subject to remove these ambiguities by discussion with others. There
are few standards that seem directly applicable to the situation, which is
a novel one for most subjects.

8. The subjects are assured that the shocks are "painful but not
dangerous." Thus they assume that the discomfort caused the victim is
momentary, while the scientific gains resulting from the experiment are
enduring.

9. Through Shock Level 20 the victim continues to provide answers on the
signal box. The subject may construe this as a sign that the victim is
still willing to "play the game." It is only after Shock Level 20 that the
victim repudiates the rules completely, refusing to answer further.

These features help to explain the high amount of obedience obtained in
this experiment. Many of the arguments raised need not remain matters of
speculation, but can be reduced to testable propositions to be confirmed or
disproved by further experiments.

The following features concern the nature of the conflict which the subject
faces.

10. The subject is placed in a position in which he must respond to the
competing demands of two persons: the experimenter and the victim. The
conflict must be resolved by meeting the demands of one or the other;
satisfaction of the victim and the experimenter are mutually exclusive.
Moreover, the resolution must take the form of a highly visible action,
that of continuing to shock the victim or breaking off the experiment. Thus
the subject is forced into a public conflict that does not permit any
completely satisfactory solution.

11. While the demands of the experimenter carry the weight of scientific
authority, the demands of the victim spring from his personal experience of
pain and suffering. The two claims need not be regarded as equally pressing
and legitimate. The experimenter seeks an abstract scientific datum; the
victim cries out for relief from physical suffering caused by the subject's
actions.

12. The experiment gives the subject little time for reflection. The
conflict comes on rapidly. It is only minutes after the subject has been
seated before the shock generator that the victim begins his protests.
Moreover, the subject perceives that he has gone through but two-thirds of
the shock levels at the time the first protests are heard. Thus he
understands that the conflict will have a persistent aspect to it, and may
well become more intense as increasingly more powerful shocks are required.

13. At a more general level, the conflict stems from the opposition of two
deeply ingrained behavior dispositions: first, the disposition not to harm
other people, and second, the tendency to obey those whom we perceive to be
legitimate authorities.

Note (from footnote 4 of the original): 43 subjects, undergraduates at Yale
University, were run in the experiment without payment. The results are
very similar to those obtained with paid subjects.
